I will never forget the first time I
visited the client in jail the heavy
metal door slammed behind me and I heard
the key turn in the lock the cement
floor underneath me had a sticky film on
it that made a ripping sound like tape
being pulled off a box every time I
moved to my foot the only connection to
the outside world was a small window
placed too high to see there was a small
square table bolted to the floor and two
metal chairs one on either side that was
the first time I understood viscerally
just for a fleeting moment what
incarceration might feel like and I
promised myself all those years ago as a
young public defender that I would never
ever forget that feeling and I never
have it inspired me to fight for each
and every one of my clients freedom as
if it was my own freedom a concept so
fundamental to the American psyche that
it is enshrined in our Constitution and
yet America is addicted to imprisonment
from slavery through mass incarceration
it always has been
look we all know the shocking numbers
the United States incarcerate smore
people per capita than almost any nation
on the planet but what you may not know
is that on any given night in America
almost half a million people go to sleep
in those concrete jail cells who have
not been convicted of anything these
mothers and fathers and sons and
daughters are there for one reason and
one reason only they cannot afford to
pay the price of their freedom and that
price is called bail now bail was
actually created as a form of
conditional release the theory was
simple set bail in an amount that
somebody could afford to pay
they would pay it it would give them an
incentive to come back to court it would
give them some skin in the game
bail was never intended to be used as
punishment bail was never intended to
hold people in jail cells and bail was
never ever intended to create a two-tier
system of justice one for the rich and
one for everybody else but that is
precisely what it is done 75 percent of
people in American local jails are there
because they cannot pay bail people like
Romero on a chilly October afternoon
rahmel was riding his bicycle in his
South Bronx neighborhood on his way to a
market to pick up a quart of milk he was
stopped by the police and demanded to
know why he was being stopped an
argument ensued and the next thing he
knew he was on the ground and handcuffs
being charged with writing her bicycle
on the sidewalk and resisting arrest he
was taken to court where a judge set
$500 bail but rimmel he didn't have $500
so this 32 year old father was sent to
the boat
a floating jail barge that sits on the
East River between a sewage plant and a
fish market that's right you heard me
in New York City in 2018 we have a
floating prison barge that sits out
there and houses primarily black and
brown men who cannot pay their bail
let's talk for a moment about what it
means to be in jail even for a few days
well it can mean losing your job losing
your home jeopardizing your immigration
status
it may even mean losing custody of your
children a third of sexual victimization
by jail staff happens in the first 30
days in jail and almost half of all jail
deaths including suicides happen in that
first week what's more if you're held in
jail on bail you are four times more
likely to get a jail sentence than if
you had been free and that jail sentence
will be three times longer and if you
are black or Latino and cash bail has
been set
you are two times more likely to remain
stuck in that jail cell than if you are
white jail in America is a terrifying
dehumanizing and violent experience now
imagine for just one moment that it's
you stuck in that jail cell and you
don't have the $500 to get out and
someone comes along and offers you a way
out just plead guilty they say you can
go home back to your job just plead
guilty you can kiss your kids goodnight
tonight so you do what anybody would do
in that situation you plead guilty
whether you did it or not but now you
have a criminal record that's going to
follow you for the rest of your life
jailing people because they don't have
enough money to pay bail is one of the
most unfair immoral things we do as a
society but it is also expensive and
counterproductive American taxpayers
they spend 14 billion dollars annually
holding people in jail cells who haven't
been convicted of anything that's 40
million dollars a day what's perhaps
more confounding is it doesn't make us
any safer research is clear that holding
somebody in jail makes you significantly
more likely to commit a crime when you
get out then if you have been free all
along freedom makes all the difference
low-income communities and communities
of color have known that for generations
together they have pooled their
resources to buy their loved ones
freedom for as long as bondage and jail
cells existed but the reach of the
criminal legal system has grown to
enormous and the numbers are just too
large
99% of jail growth in America has been
the result over the last 20 years of
pretrial incarceration I have been a
public defender for over half my life
and I have stood by and watched
thousands of
and they were dragged into those jail
cells because they didn't have enough
money to pay bail
I am watched as questions of Justice
were subsumed by questions of money
calling it to question the legitimacy of
the entire American legal system I am
here to say something simple something
obvious but something urgent freedom
makes all the difference and freedom
should be free
when how are we gonna make that happen
well that's the question I was wrestling
with over a decade ago and I was sitting
at a kitchen table with my husband David
it was also a public defender we were
eating our Chinese takeout and venting
about the unjustice of it all when David
looked up and said why don't we just
start a bail fund and just start bailing
our clients out of jail and in that
unexpected moment the idea for the Bronx
freedom fund was born look we didn't
know what to expect there were plenty of
people that told us we were crazy and
we're gonna lose all of the money people
wouldn't come back because they didn't
have any stake in it but what if clients
did come back we knew that bail money
comes back at the end of a criminal case
so it could come back into the fund and
we could use it over and over again for
more and more bail that was our big bet
and that bet paid off over the past ten
years we have been paying bails the
low-income residents of New York City
and what we have learned have exploded
our ideas of why people come back to
court and how the criminal legal system
itself is operated turns out money isn't
what makes people come back to court we
know this because when the Bronx Freedom
Fund pays bail ninety-six percent of
clients return for every court
appearance laying waste to the myth that
it's money that mattered it's powerful
evidence that we don't need cash or
ankle bracelets or unnecessary systems
of surveillance and supervision
we simply need court reminders simple
Court reminders about when to come back
to court next we learned that if you're
held in jail on a misdemeanor ninety
percent of people will plead guilty but
when the Fund pays bail over half the
cases are dismissed and in the entire
history of the Bronx freedom fund fewer
than two percent of our clients have
ever received a jail sentence of any
time
rahmel a week later he was still on the
boat locked in that jail cell he was on
the cusp of losing everything and he was
about to plead guilty and the Bronx
freedom Vaughn intervened and paid his
bail now reunited with his daughter he
was able to fight his case from outside
look it took some time two years to be
exact
but at the end of that his case was
dismissed in its entirety for rimmel
rimmel the Bronx freedom fund was a
lifeline but for countless other
Americans locked in jail cells there is
no freedom fund coming it's time to do
something about that it's time to do
something big it's time to do something
bold it's time to do something maybe
audacious we want to take our proven
revolving bail fund a model that we
built in the Bronx and spread it across
America attacking the front end of the
legal system before incarceration begins
here's the plan we're gonna bail out as
many people as we can as quickly as we
can over the next five years partnering
with public defenders and local
community organizations we're gonna set
up 40 sites in high-need jurisdictions
the goal is to bail out 160,000 people
our strategy leverages the fact that
bail money comes back at the end of the
case data from the Bronx shows that $1
in bail can be used two or three times a
year creating a massive force multiplier
so $1 donated today can be used to pay
bail for up to 15 people over the next
five years
our strategy also relies on the
experience and the wisdom and the
leadership of those who have experienced
this injustice firsthand each bail
project site will be staffed by a team
of bail disruptors these are passionate
dedicated advocates and local
communities many of whom were formerly
incarcerated themselves who will pay
bails and support clients while their
cases are going through the legal system
providing them with whatever resources
and support they may need our first two
sites are up and running one in Tulsa
Oklahoma and one in st. Louis Missouri
and rimmel he's training right now to be
a bail disrupter in Queens County New
York
our next three sites are ready to launch
in Dallas Detroit and Louisville
Kentucky the build project will attack
the money bail system on an
unprecedented scale
we will also listen collect and elevate
and honor the stories of our clients so
that we can change hearts and minds and
we will collect critical national data
that we need so we can chart a better
path forward and that so that we do not
recreate this system of oppression in
just another form the bail project by
bailing out a hundred and sixty thousand
people over the next five years will
become one of the largest
non-governmental Dieker serrations of
Americans in history so look the
criminal legal system as it exists it
needs to be dismantled but here's the
thing I know from decades in the system
real systemic change takes time and it
takes a variety of strategies so it's
going to take all of us it's going to
take the civil rights litigators the
community organizers the academics the
media the philanthropist the students
the singers the poets and of course the
voices and efforts of those who were
impacted by this system but here's what
I also know together I believe we can
end mass incarceration but one last
thing those people sitting in America in
those jail cells in every corner of the
country who are held in jail on bail
bondage right now they need a lifeline
today that's where the bail project
comes in we have a proven model a plan
of action and a growing network of bail
disruptors who are audacious enough to
dream big and fight hard one bail at a
time for as long as it takes until true
freedom and equal justice are a reality
in America
[Applause]